# The environment

## Environment variables

The shell maintains a set of information during a shell session, known as __the
environment__. It's just a series of key-value pairs that define properties like:

- your home directory;
- your working directory;
- the name of your shell;
- the name of the logged-in user;

and these differ from one session to the next.

These key-value pairs known as the __environment variables__.

Use [printenv](/linux/terminal/commands/printenv.md) to print the environment variables.

The names of these variables are case-sensitive.

To set environment variable use [export](/linux/terminal/commands/export.md) command.

Environment variables are kind of like global variables for shell session. They will be
accessible in all child shell sessions and in each child processes and other commands.

### Common used environment variables

- `DISPLAY` - the name of your display if you are running a graphical environment.
Usually this is `:0`, meaning the first display generated by the X server.
- `HISTSIZE` - the size of command history.
- `HOME` - current user's home directory;
- `LANG` - defines the character set and collation order of your language;
- `OLDPWD` - previous location;
- `PATH` - a colon-separated list of directories that are searched when you enter the
name of an executable program.
- `SHELL` - the name of your shell program.
- `USER` - the name of the current user;
- `PWD` - stores current working directory;
- [PS1](environment_variables/ps1.md) - variable that governs prompt;
- `TERM` - the name of your terminal type. Unix-like systems support many terminal
protocols; this variable sets the protocol to be used with your terminal emulator;
- `USER` - Your username;

## Shell variables

To define a __shell variable__, use the syntax `variable=value`.

Built-in variables are upper-cased, so it's a common convention to lowercase custom
variables to prevent confusion.

```shell
color=purple
echo $color
# purple
```

You can use quotes if you value contain spaces.

```shell
name="James Smith"
```

```shell
num=737
echo $num
# 737
```

We defined shell variables. They are not environment variables. If we type
`printenv color` we will see nothing.

Shell variables are kind of like local variables. They only exist in our current shell
session.

But it is not difficult to make our shell variable an environment variable, using
`export` command:

```shell
# this is shell variable
color=purple

# now it turns to environment variable
export color
```

Set a new value to existing variable:

```shell
# create variable
color=purple
# set a new value
color=red
```

## Startup files

There are multiple files on our machine that are very particular files that bash looks
for. The shell will look to and read information from. They include configuration
details, instructions, predefined variables and functions, just a bunch of config stuff.

When we log in, the shell reads information from startup files. First, the shell reads
from global config files that effects the environment for all users. Then, the shell
reads startup files for specific users.

The specific files the shell reads from depends on the type of session: *login* or
*non-login* shell sessions.

* __A login shell session__ is one in which we are prompted for our username and
password.
* __A non-login-shell session__ is typically occurs when we launch a terminal session in
the GUI.

Startup files for login shell sessions:

- `/etc/profile` - global config for all users;
- `~/.bash_profile` - user's personal config file;
- `~/.bash_login` - read if bash_profile isn't found;
- `~/.profile` - used if previous two aren't found;

Startup files for non-login shell sessions:

- `etc/bash.bashrc` - global config for all users
- `~/.bashrc` - specific settings for each user.

In addition to reading the startup files listed above, non-login shells inherit the
environment from their parent process, usually a login shell.

### Which files should be modified?

As a general rule, to add directories to your `PATH` or define additional environment
variables, place those changes in `.bash_profile` (or the equivalent, according to your
distribution; for example, Ubuntu uses `.profile`). For everything else, place the
changes in `.bashrc`.
